Here are some requirements before implementing a SIEM solutions

1- SIEM implementation requirements 
SIEM solutions are often complex and there is a wide variety. Deploying them can be tricky, 
especially in large organizations with hundreds or thousands of data sources. IT and security 
teams can also be strained.
Here are some tips to ensure a good implementation of a SIEM:
- Plan the deployment carefully
- Choose the object of monitoring
- Pay attention to the existing security stack
- Understand the pricing model
- Determine the features you really need
- Be aware that this will not replace the man
- Recognize the limits
- Test and adjust the solution
- Find supplements

1.1- Carefully plan the deployment
Carefully planning your SIEM deployment can mean the difference between getting the most 
out of this technology and adding unnecessary overhead to your organization. You'll have to 
choose between different vendors, deployment models (on-premises, SaaS, hybrid), staffing 
strategies, and more.
Many organizations can benefit from a phased approach, starting with a small pilot project to 
assess the desirability of a SIEM solution before moving to a larger deployment. These types 
of solutions often require manual adjustments. False positives are extremely common, and a 
poorly designed SIEM implementation can generate thousands of alerts that security teams 
will be unable to track. Business leaders and managers need to be involved every step of the 
way, from preparation to deployment.

1.2- Choosing the object of monitoring
Capturing data from a variety of sources is the foundation of SIEM tools. Ideally, you would 
feed the solution with the widest variety of data possible, but that's not always feasible.
Technical and budgetary constraints can lead to a limitation on the total amount of data that 
the SIEM solution will ingest, along with difficult decisions about which logs to ignore. For 
businesses where regulatory compliance is necessary, existing industry regulations or 
frameworks may dictate the data to be collected.
In general, it is recommended to ingest event logs from firewalls, file and directory servers, 
intrusion detection/protection systems, and possibly endpoint security software. Additionally, 
ingesting the logs of DNS servers your organization can greatly contextualize security 
investigations and help spot sophisticated attacks. Don't forget about cloud services or 
applications, which can be widely used.
Typically, it should integrate and combine events from heterogeneous data streams, such as 
those from on-premises data repositories, cloud sources, Active Directory, Azure AD, email, 
DNS servers, VPNs, and Web proxies to add unique context to alerts, such as file sensitivity 
and account type, making them more actionable than traditional SIEM alerts.

1.3- Pay attention to the existing security stack
All major SIEM tools offer various integrations, but the extent of these integrations and the 
degree of difficulty in setting them up can vary greatly. When deciding on a SIEM tool, it is 
essential to choose a product that is highly compatible with the unique combination of 
products already used by your organization. Ignoring this factor can lead to increased 
operational complexity and administrative burden. For example, choosing a SIEM product 
that does not work well with your firewall can significantly limit the qualities of this tool.
In many cases, SIEM integration is a hands-on operation, and it can take multiple steps to 
complete. Keep this in mind when looking for a solution, as the cost of labor required to set 
it up correctly can easily negate any cost savings promised by the supplier.

1.4- Understanding the pricing model
SIEM tool vendors have implemented various pricing models for their products. Some charge 
by the number of users, others by the number of events, and still others use flat-rate or tiered 
pricing models. It's critical that decision makers, both technical and business, understand how 
these pricing models work and know which model makes the most sense for their 
organization. In particular, per-event pricing models can lead to unpleasant surprises for 
companies that don't carefully examine their existing environment.

1.5- Determine the features you really need
Many SIEM solutions are offered a la carte, allowing an organization to choose the features 
or functionality that suits them best. Basic features, such as event log management and alerts, 
are usually offered at the lowest level, but more advanced features may require additional 
fees. Threat intelligence, automated remediation capabilities, and long-term data retention all 
often cost more. It is important to perform a cost-benefit analysis not only for the SIEM 
solution as a whole, but also for any planned expansion.

1.6- Be aware that this will not replace the human being
Increasingly, SIEM tools leverage automation and artificial intelligence to deliver new 
capabilities and increased efficiency. However, this does not necessarily translate into a 
reduced need for human talent. In fact, SIEM solutions can require a lot of human interaction 
to resolve alerts, perform additional research if needed, and generally manage the solution. 
Some tools may also require quite extensive training and specialized skills. If you're looking
to cut costs with SIEM, it's unlikely to involve a small workforce.
Even though the human element in the alerting process is not (yet) obsolete, SIEM helps 
reduce the interactions and manual labor required to triage the huge volume of data security 
events. DatAlert puts alerts in a larger context by linking users to devices and locations, 
learning their behavior and overlaying additional information. For example: Is the user who 
triggered the alert on a watchlist? Has it triggered any other alerts recently? Normally, does 
he have access to sensitive data? This additional context allows you to quickly determine 
whether an alert represents a real threat or a minor anomaly, without spending hours 
assembling logs.

1.7- Recognize the limits
While SIEM tools provide great visibility across an organization, they often have “blind 
spots”. Mobile devices, remote workers, and cloud applications are examples of areas where 
SIEM often struggles. It is important that companies recognize these limitations and act 
accordingly.
Even in areas where SIEM is good, like network monitoring, it's not uncommon for the tools 
to lack important contextual data. Remote access tools like VNC and TeamViewer are a great 
example. It is easy to spot the network traffic generated by these tools, but without sufficient 
context, a SIEM solution cannot distinguish a legitimate user from an attacker using the same 
tool to exfiltrate data. A SIEM tool may also have difficulty detecting attacks that use 
legitimate services, for example, malware that sends Command and Control (C&C) traffic 
back to a server hosted on a Content Delivery Network (CDN) or a public cloud service.

1.8- Test and adjust the solution
Every day, new types of threats appear; it is therefore important to constantly assess your 
defenses and address weak points. SIEM tools are no exception. The intervention of an 
internal Red Team or an external penetration testing service can help you assess the real 
effectiveness of your SIEM solution. New rules can then be added to respond to threats that 
did not generate. Tools like Atomic Red Team and Caldera of MITRE can be used between 
full penetration tests to analyze solution performance on an ongoing basis.
Alert fatigue is a common problem in many security operations centers. If you don't set alert 
thresholds appropriately, your analysts can get used to seeing false positives, to the point of 
not reacting to a real threat. It's important to tune any SIEM solution to find a good balance 
between excessive alerts and lack of visibility.

1.9- Find complements
Like all security products, SIEM tools should never be used exclusively or in place of other 
types of protective measures. While SIEM platforms can increasingly take automated action 
in response to certain types of events, they do not replace front-line defenses such as antivirus software and firewalls. SIEM tools are most effective when organizations already have 
a well-designed information security program in place.
