After analysis for my research project I've decided to choose Wazuh + ELK Stack for several reasons:

- It is open source and you would only pay for cloud support or monitoring, but not the one we 
need as we are looking for a solution.
- It is not a limited release (as with OSSIM, Prelude OSS or SIEMonster). It has all the features.
- It is based on a recognized prestige HIDS, such as OSSEC.
- Up-to-date and very complete online documentation.
- Easily scalable cluster, both Wazuh and ELK Stack.
- Above all, it meets all the requirements given in the section

Specific analysis of the chosen SIEM: Wazuh + ELK Stack

**** Wazuh Abilities ****

Wazuh provides the following features:

• Security analysis
Wazuh is used to collect, aggregate, index and analyze security data, helping organizations 
detect intrusions, threats and behavioral anomalies.
As cyber threats become more sophisticated, real-time security monitoring and analysis is 
required for rapid threat detection and remediation. That's why our lightweight agent provides 
the necessary monitoring and response capabilities, while our server component provides 
security intelligence and performs data analysis.

• Intrusion detection
Wazuh agents scan monitored systems for malware, rootkits and suspicious anomalies. They 
can detect hidden files, hidden processes or unregistered network listeners, as well as 
inconsistencies in responses to system calls.
In addition to the agent's capabilities, the server component uses a signature-based approach 
to intrusion detection, using its regular expression engine to analyze collected log data and 
search for indicators of compromise.

• Log data analysis
Wazuh agents read operating system and application logs, and transmit them securely to a 
central manager for analysis and storage based
on rules.Wazuh rules notify you of application or system errors, misconfigurations, successful 
malicious attempts and/or activities, policy violations, and a variety of other security and 
operational issues.

• File integrity monitoring
Wazuh monitors the file system, identifying changes in file content, permissions, ownership, 
and attributes that you need to monitor. Additionally, it natively identifies users and 
applications used to create or modify files.
File integrity monitoring capabilities can be used in combination with threat intelligence to 
identify threats or compromised hosts. Additionally, several regulatory compliance standards, 
such as PCI DSS, require it.

• Vulnerability detection
Wazuh agents extract software inventory data and send this information to the server, where 
it is correlated with continuously updated Common Vulnerabilities and Exposure (CVE) 
databases, to identify well-known vulnerable software.
Automated vulnerability assessment helps you find weak spots in your critical assets and take 
corrective action before attackers exploit them to sabotage your business or steal confidential 
data.

• Configuration Assessment
Wazuh monitors system and application configuration settings to ensure they comply with 
your security policies, standards, and/or hardening guides. Agents perform periodic scans to 
detect applications known to be vulnerable, unpatched, or configured insecurely.
Additionally, configuration controls can be customized, tailoring them to properly align with 
your organization. Alerts include recommendations for best configuration, benchmarks, and 
mapping to regulatory compliance.

• Incident Response
Wazuh provides out-of-the-box active responses to perform various countermeasures to deal 
with active threats, such as blocking access to a system from the source of the threat when 
certain criteria are met.
Additionally, Wazuh can be used to remotely execute system commands or queries, 
identifying Indicators of Compromise (IOCs), and assisting with other live forensic or 
incident response tasks.

• Regulatory conformity
Wazuh provides some of the security controls needed to comply with industry standards and 
regulations. These features, combined with its scalability and cross-platform support, help 
organizations meet technical compliance requirements.
Wazuh is widely used by payment processing companies and financial institutions to meet 
PCI DSS (Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard) requirements. Its web-based user 
interface provides reports and dashboards that can help with this and other regulations such 
as GDPR, NIST 800-53, GPG13, TSC SOC2, and HIPAA.

• Cloud Security
Wazuh helps monitor cloud infrastructure at the API level, using integration modules capable 
of extracting security data from well-known cloud providers, such as Amazon AWS, Azure.
or Google Cloud. Additionally, Wazuh provides rules to assess the configuration of your 
cloud environment, easily spotting weaknesses.
Additionally, lightweight, cross-platform Wazuh agents are commonly used to monitor 
instance-level cloud environments.

• Container Security
Wazuh provides security visibility into your Docker hosts and containers, monitoring their 
behavior and detecting threats, vulnerabilities, and anomalies. Wazuh agent has native 
integration with Docker engine allowing users to monitor images, volumes, network settings 
and running containers.
Wazuh continuously collects and analyzes detailed execution information. For example, 
alerting for containers running in privileged mode, vulnerable applications, a shell running 
inside a container, changes to persistent volumes or images, and other possible threats.
